Octavia burst into a storm of weeping at the terrible intelligence,
for she had been partially deceived by the protestations of
Agrippina. Britannicus sat down and covered his face with his hands.
He had always assumed that he would at least share the throne with
the youth whom Claudius, at the wearying importunities of his mother,
had needlessly adopted, and had repented of having adopted. But
he loved his father, who had always been kind to him, and at that
dreadful moment no selfish thought intruded on his anguish. After the
first burst of sorrow, he got up from his seat, and tenderly clasped
the hand of his sister.

‘Octavia,’ he said, ‘we are orphans now--fatherless, motherless, the
last of our race. We will be true to each other. Take courage. Be
comforted. Antonia,’ he added, gently taking his half-sister by the
hand, ‘I will be a loyal brother to you both.’


But now a new trouble had arisen. Nero began to seek the company of
such effeminate specimens of the ‘gilded youth’ of Rome as Otho and
Tullius Senecio. They were his ready tutors in every vice, and he was
a pupil whose fatal aptitude soon equalled, if it did not surpass,
the viciousness of his instructors.

Partly through their bad influence, he had devoted himself heart and
soul to Acte, the beautiful freedwoman of Octavia. It was impossible
that any secret of the Palace could long be concealed from the
vigilant eyes of Agrippina. She had discovered the amour, and had
burst into furious reproaches. What angered her was, not that the
Emperor should disgrace himself by vice, but that a freedwoman should
interfere with the supremacy of her will, and be a rival with her
for the affections of her son. A little forbearance, a little calm
advice, might have proved a turning point in the life of one who
was not yet an abandoned libertine, but rather a shy and timid youth
dabbling with his first experiences of wrong. His nature, indeed, was
endowed with the evil legacy of many an hereditary taint, but if it
was as wax to the stamp of evil, it was not as yet incapable of being
moulded into good. But Agrippina committed two fatal errors. At first
she was loudly indignant, and when by such conduct she had terrified
her son into the confidence of Otho and Senecio, she saw her mistake
too late, and flew into the opposite extreme of complaisance. Nero at
that time regarded her with positive dread, but his fear was weakened
when he saw that, on the least sign of his displeasure, she passed
from fierce objurgations to complete submission. In dealing with her
son, Agrippina lost the astuteness which had carried her triumphantly
through all her previous designs.

‘A thing is either right or wrong,’ he said; ‘if it is wrong no
amount of expediency can sanction it, no skill of special pleading
can make it other than reprehensible. The passions cannot be checked
by sanctioning their indulgence, but by training youth in the
manliness of self-control. You wish to prevent the Emperor from
disgracing himself with the crimes which rendered execrable the
reigns of Tiberius and Gaius. Can you do it otherwise than by
teaching him that what he _ought_ to do is also what he _can_ do?
Is the many-headed monster of the young man’s impulses to be checked
by giving it the mastery, or rather by putting it under the dominion
of his reason?’

‘I cannot judge by abstract considerations of ethics. I must judge as
a statesman,’ said Seneca, somewhat offended.

‘Then, if you are only a statesman, do not pretend to act as a
philosopher. I speak to you frankly, as one Stoic to another.’

Seneca said nothing. It was evident that he felt deeply hurt by the
bluntness of Cornutus, who paused for a moment, regarding him with a
look of pity. Then he continued.

‘If it pains you to hear the truth I will be silent; but if you wish
me to speak without reserve, you are committing two fatal errors.
You dream of controlling passion by indulging it. You are conceding
liberty in one set of vices in the vain hope of saving Nero from
another. But all vices are inextricably linked together. And you
have committed a second mistake, not only by addressing your pupil
in language of personal flattery, but also by inflating him with a
belief in his own illimitable power.’


But the extravagant joy of Nero was rudely quenched. Before four
months had ended the infant Claudia Augusta died, and Nero was
plunged in a grief as extravagant as had been his delight. 


Such was the state of things in the days of Nero. The aristocracy
were like men who live in an unknown land, glancing on every side
at the slightest sound. Seneca, who had lived through that reign
of terror, most truly depicts it. His sole remedy is stubborn
resignation. Even abstinence from action requires prudence, for you
may be condemned for what you do _not_ do. Above all must men shun
the Court, ‘that sad prison of slaves.’ But, after every precaution,
no one could be safe, and therefore, Stoic-fashion, men must accustom
themselves to regard all calamities as matters of indifference.
‘Above all, is not suicide always possible?’ Seneca asks; ‘and is
not that the best antidote to tyranny? The path of escape is open
everywhere. Do you see this precipice? It is the descent to Liberty!
Do you see this sea, this well, this river? Liberty lies hidden in
their depths! Do you see this little barren, distorted tree? Liberty
hangs from its branches!’[116] The historian is reminded of the
picture of Pascal. ‘Imagine a number of men in chains, all condemned
to death, some of whom have their throats cut daily in sight of the
rest, while the survivors see in their fate their own condition, and
gaze one on another with sorrow, and without hope.’

