“What! There’s a child down there and nobody’s gone after her?” cried
Jack indignantly.

As he spoke, he stripped off his coat and removed his boots almost with
one operation. Then, shoving the men aside, he dived from the edge of
the dock into the strip of dark, dirty water that lay between the ship
and the wharf.

Clinging frantically to one of the piles supporting the dock was a
little girl with a wealth of fair hair and a pretty, flower-like face.
Too terrified even to scream, she was holding to the rough woodwork with
all her little strength, but the expression of her face showed plainly
that the struggle could not last much longer. In fact, as Jack, with a
few strong, swift strokes, reached her side her grip relaxed altogether,
and she slipped back into the oil-streaked water just in time for his
strong arms to seize and hold her.

It was all over so quickly that hardly a moment seemed to have elapsed
from the instant that the lad sprang from the stringpiece of the dock to
the time when the cheering crowd above beheld him clinging to the rough
surface of the pile with one hand, while with the other he supported the
child, who had fainted and lay white-faced and weak in his grasp.


“Come back when you’re older. We can’t use kids,” the head of a big
wireless concern had told him. And that was the substance of most of the
replies to his applications for a job at the work he loved.

That day he had tramped on foot to Manhattan and made his weary round
once more, with the same result. Footsore and thoroughly discouraged, he
had trudged back over Brooklyn Bridge and across town to the region of
the Basin, where the air bristled with masts and derricks, and queer,
foreign, spicy smells issued from the doors of warehouses. He walked,
for the excellent reason that he was young and strong, and every nickel
saved meant a better chance to improve the equipment of his station on
the old _Venus_.

He cheered up a bit as he came in sight of his floating home. He had
grown to like his odd way of life, and he had a sincere affection for
his eccentric old uncle. Determined not to let the old man see his
disappointment, he struck up “Nancy Lee,” whistling it bravely as he
crossed the rickety gangplank, walked over the scrupulously scrubbed
deck and dived down the companionway into one of the strangest homes
that any boy in all New York ever inhabited.


“Hopeless—Boat wouldn’t live a minute in this sea—she’ll go before eight
bells—Yes, bound for Davy Jones’ locker, poor devils.”

Jack’s pulses beat fast as he heard. Could it be that the _Ajax_ was to
make no effort to rescue the crew of the wreck? His heart throbbed as if
it would choke him. He felt suddenly angry, furiously angry with the
three men on the bridge, who stood so calmly talking over the situation
while less than a mile away, there was a wrecked ship wallowing in the
mighty seas without a chance for her life.

Had he dared, he would have stepped forward and volunteered to form part
of a boat’s crew, no matter what the risk. His father’s seafaring blood
ran in his veins, and he could recall hearing both Captain Amos Ready
and his Uncle Toby recounting to each other, over their pipes, tales of
sea-rescues.

“Uncle Toby is right,” thought the boy, with a white-hot flush of
indignation: “seamanship is dead nowadays. The men who go to sea in
these steel tanks are without hearts.”

They rose on the top of another mountainous wave and Jack had his first
good view of the forlorn wreck. She was evidently a sailing vessel,
although of what rig could not be made out, for her masts were gone. A
more hopeless, melancholy sight than this storm-riven, sea-racked
derelict could not be imagined. Her bowsprit still remained, and as she
rose upward on a wave with the star pointed to the scurrying gray
clouds, Jack’s excited fancy saw in it a mute appeal for aid.


